[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> "Creating True Prosperity"
is a wonderful book.
And I thank you for writing it.
>> Thank you.
>> One of the things
that's interesting to me,
and I'd love to hear
you talk about it,
just to personalize it, to
put myself out on a limb,
I have less now than
I did five years ago.
>> Less in terms of
the material things?
>> Material goods,
make less money.
And I'm happier.
Now, how does that
equate to prosperity?
You'd think I'd be saying, if
I only made this much money
or had this much stuff.
But I have less and I'm happier.
>> Sure.
Well, as I say in
the book, most of us
automatically equate
prosperity with money,
that if we have a
certain amount of money,
then we'll be prosperous.
But, in fact, most
people I know have
more the kind of experience
you're talking about which
is, no matter how
much money we make,
even if we're really making a
lot of money or good incomes,
life gets very complex
and very stressful.
And along with the money
comes a lot of complications--
>> Yes.
>> --and more responsibilities,
and stress, and so forth.
And a lot of people I know
have simplified their lives
and gotten more clear on
priorities, and, like you,
let go of some of the things
that aren't so important
and are focusing on
what is important,
work that's meaningful--
>> Exactly.
>> --deep relationships,
just time for oneself,
which are the things we tend
to lose when we get more
"financially prosperous."
>> I find our world
today to be so hectic.
It moves so fast.
And it's so insane.
And so many people are
seeking that simplicity.
What would you say
to those people
in terms of the first step?
A lot of people are
filled with intention,
but they don't
know how to start.
>> Yeah.
That's a tricky one.
Well, first of all,
what you're describing
is what I call the epidemic of
our culture, which is actually
time poverty.
>> Interesting.
>> More of us, or many of
us, who are fairly prosperous
financially, or
relatively speaking,
the more prosperous
we get financially,
the more poverty of
time we experience.
>> Very interesting.
>> How to address that, one
thing is to begin to recognize
the value of being.
In our culture,
we so value doing.
We're supposed to
be doing something.
We're supposed to be
achieving, and accomplishing,
and producing
something all the time.
And we think of being
as wasting our time.
>> Yes.
>> Whereas being is a profound
human experience that we need
to balance.
Being is a time of
quietness, and reflection,
and replenishment that we
need to balance that outgoing
and doing.
So we have to create some
space for that in our lives.
>> And in order to do that, we
have to value and experience
it.
So any form of meditation, or
relaxation, or self-nurturing,
taking a hot bath and listening
to some beautiful music,
taking a walk.
Being in contact
with nature, that's
another thing we're
so missing that
can be so deeply fulfilling.
>> I want to see if I
get what you're saying.
We've been taught that
simply being is not doing,
but doing nothing.
>> Right.
>> And people feel
that's not valuable.
>> Yes, exactly.
If you're not actively
engaged in moving forward
toward a goal, or
creating something,
accomplishing something, we
think of that as wasting time.
And the people who are more
inclined in that direction
are often thought of as
dreamers, and time wasters,
non-productive people.
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
>> Most of us super productive,
active people manage to attract
somebody into our life,
whether our partner, or friend,
or our child who is the more
being type of person because we
need that balance.
>> Then maybe I had
this as a child,
because my report
card always said,
Chantal is too
much of a dreamer.
>> You probably did.
>> So I had it going on
back then, So that's good.
>> And good for you, you know?
So we need to have that balance.
>> Yes.
>> And it's tough.
It's a difficult
thing in our culture.
I think we have to find some way
of making a commitment to that,
and having some, even if it's
a few minutes, of quiet time.
>> It's very interesting
you use the word balance,
because as I travel about the
country with WISDOM Television
and I talk to healers,
and seers, and chanters,
and so many of the authors who
are really making a difference
in our world today, so
many spiritual leaders,
and the word I hear, almost
every day, is balance.
>> That's the word I find
myself saying and using the most
in my workshops and
in my life as well.
>> Why is that?
>> To me, it seems that is
one of our fundamental needs
in life is to develop all
the many different aspects
of ourselves.
And when we do that,
we find a certain kind
of balance and wholeness.
But most of us, we have certain
qualities very developed.
And we have other qualities
that are undeveloped in us.
And that leads to a kind of
a lopsided experience of life
which, ultimately, is
painful and frustrating.
For example, we've talked about
the doing and being polarities.
Let's talk about responsibility.
I'm a super responsible
person, which
means that I kind
of automatically
take on responsibilities
and will always
try to do the responsible thing,
which is a wonderful quality.
>> Yes.
>> And it can be too much.
I can take on too much
and practically die
trying to fulfill all
my responsibilities.
>> Yes.
>> So there's an opposite
quality there which you could
think of as irresponsible, if
you look at it in a negative
way.
>> Yeah, if you look at
it in terms of polarities.
>> Right.
>> Responsible.
Non-responsible.
>> Yeah, so nobody wants
to be irresponsible.
But if you look
beneath that judgment
to find what is the positive
essence of that quality
that we need, it's relax, the
ability to relax, or carefree,
being a little lighter
and more carefree.
And that's a balance.
I need more carefree
energy in my life,
so I have to do the work of
being a little less identified
with being so responsible and
bringing a little bit more
of that lighthearted
and carefree quality.
And then I feel better
and my life works better.
>> And we know, we have a sense.
I don't know if it's
just us baby boomers,
I would say not,
because even kids,
even kids that I
talk to today, they
have a sense that something is
out of balance in the world.
They have a sense that
something is out of balance
with them, within themselves,
individually, I mean.
I don't know a
time in my lifetime
when we've recognized
it more than we do now.
Why is that?
What is happening in the
world, if I can ask you
such a global question--
>> Sure.
>> --because I've talked
about this stuff all my life.
But never have I talked
so much about balance.
>> It's just what's up in
our evolutionary process,
as I believe that humanity
is in an ongoing evolutionary
process, and all of
us are a part of that.
And whatever we're
working with, whatever
issues we're working within
our own individual lives,
they're also part of
the collective issues
that we're working
on in our world.
And so balance, we've gotten
to a place where we actually
can address quality of life.
Up until now, most of
us have been preoccupied
with just trying to survive.
>> Yes.
>> And most of humanity still
is preoccupied with just trying
to survive.
>> Yes.
>> We're extremely fortunate,
those of us who have enough
affluence to live
in this culture,
that we don't have to
just try to survive,
we now have the luxury of
trying to find deeper meaning,
and purpose, and
fulfillment in life.
And I believe that we also
have a responsibility, then,
to do that.
That's our piece that
we can contribute
to the whole of humanity.
>> So you mean when we
recognize we're out of balance,
it's up to us to find a balance.
>> That's right.
And as we do that in our own
individual lives, whatever
step of healing, and
development, and growth
we do as individuals,
we also contribute that
into the collective
consciousness.
And, in fact, to me,
that's the only way
we can truly change the
world and change and heal
what's happening on our planet
is by doing the deep healing
work in ourselves, finding
more of that balance,
that integration in
ourselves and in our lives.
And then that's how we bring
balance into the world.
>> And oddly enough,
when that balance comes,
that is one of the things,
one of the very things,
that does lead us to prosperity.
>> Well, that's essentially
what I'm saying in this book--
>> Yes.
>> --and in these workshops
is that prosperity is
a reflection-- first of all,
prosperity is not a thing out
there.
It's an experience.
You can have all the money in
the world and not experience
prosperity because it's
an internal experience.
>> I want you to say that again,
because it's very important.
>> OK.
Yeah.
>> Prosperity--
>> First of all, prosperity
is not caused by money.
You can have a very high
degree of prosperity
with a very simple life
and not much money,
or you can have a high degree of
prosperity with a lot of money.
But most people, at
every level of income,
don't experience
very much prosperity.
They experience
stress, and troubles,
and unfulfilled feelings,
and all kinds of things.
So it's not that money can
really bring us prosperity.
It may be a part of that.
But prosperity is an experience.
And it comes from being in touch
with our hearts, and our souls,
and what we truly need,
want, and value in life.
And the more we are fulfilled,
in terms of what we truly
need and want on all levels,
spiritually, emotionally,
mentally, and
physically, then the more
we're in touch with that, the
more prosperity we experience.
So what I said is, prosperity
isn't really external.
It's an internal experience
that comes, basically,
as a result of having
our needs met, and not
just our physical needs.
>> Yes.
>> That's why,
materialistically,
you can have all the money and
possessions in the world and it
might make you
happy on some level,
but it won't fulfill the
spiritual or the emotional
needs that we have.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> On the road to prosperity,
I love the exercises we have
to do in the book, where
you go someplace quiet--
>> Well, there's a really
simple exercise I do with people
in workshops where first,
I ask them to think about
the prosperity you
already have in your life.
Because we all already
have certain things--
>> Yes
>> --that are very--
make us feel good,
make us happy.
>> The gratitude exercise.
>> Yeah, so then we start
by having appreciation
and gratitude for
what we already have.
Then the second step is the
more challenging one, for most
of us, which is then to take
a real good honest look inside
to see, what don't
you have in your life?
And that's more scary,
because in order--
>> Very.
>> -- to do that--
>> For a lot of people.
>> Mm-hmm.
We have to be willing to
feel some of our pain.
Now, I happen to believe
that feeling the pain that's
in there, or the discomfort,
or the emptiness,
or whatever it might be, is a
necessary step in addressing
it and beginning to heal it.
But our whole culture
tells us, if you have pain,
try to get away from it
as quickly as possible.
Take a pill.
>> Don't feel it.
Don't feel it, it's too scary.
And most of us are very afraid
of our own deep feelings
for that reason.
So taking a look at, what part
of your life isn't fulfilling?
Usually, most of us tend to
have some places in our life
where we feel pretty good, or
things are working pretty well.
There's a certain
fulfillment there.
For example, in my life,
in terms of my work,
I love my work.
My work has been
very successful.
I feel kind of filled
up in the part of me
that wants to make a
contribution to life
and wants to have
meaningful work.
That really works for me.
>> OK.
So that's get down
to the nitty-gritty.
>> So OK--
>> Where's your pain?
>> Yeah.
>> In the personal part.
>> The pain is more
on the personal level.
Like many people who
are very successful,
my work takes over my life.
And even though I love it,
there's not enough time for me.
And there's not enough time
for my intimate relationships,
and so on.
And I'm saying this as
something that I work on
on an ongoing basis.
So, for me, it's
more the longing is--
actually, for me,
you know what it is?
It's to stay home because
I travel all the time.
I have this exciting life
and wonderful in many ways.
But I've been doing
it for a long time.
>> And people are always saying,
oh, your life is so glamorous,
I wish I had it.
And you go, right.
Sure.
>> For most people, the thought
of all that traveling would be
exciting.
For me, it's like,
oh, I just want
to stay home for the weekend.
I just want to have
a weekend at home.
And when I do, I'm so happy.
>> Well, that's part of the
reason why I think your books
are so successful and your
workshops are so huge,
because you have
enough integrity,
and enough emotional
availability,
and honesty to say, OK, do you
want to know what my pain is,
because that's the same pain
that a lot of people have.
>> Thank you.
>> You're welcome.
I thank you.
And lots of people thank you.
But that's the pain
a lot of people have.
And it's very difficult.
And sometimes,
I think it's almost
embarrassing to say,
you know where my pain is?
It's the personal part.
It's the intimate
relationships part.
And yet, you have rooms
filled with people
listening to you saying, yeah.
>> Yeah.
Well, one of the
most important things
I've learned over the years
is that as human beings,
we're all very vulnerable.
>> You talk about that--
>> We have a lot--
>> --a lot.
>> --of vulnerability.
And that is one of the
most disowned qualities
in our culture too.
We're supposed to be very
strong, and together,
and not need
anybody or anything,
and have all the answers.
That's how most of
us try to be, anyway.
And we disown our vulnerability.
And yet, we all have
lots of emotional needs,
and feelings, and sensitivities.
And to me, it's
an act of courage
to own the vulnerable
part, and the power too.
We have power and we
have vulnerability.
How do we balance?
>> Balance?
>> How do we hold and own
both those polarities?
>> Well, I would suggest that I
think a lot of people stay away
from the vulnerable parts,
because people associate
hurting with vulnerability.
>> Yeah.
Vulnerability means
able to be hurt.
I mean, that's what it implies.
If we're invulnerable,
it means nobody
can penetrate, nobody can get
to us, nobody can hurt us.
But nobody can deeply
relate to us either.
So vulnerability is the risk
that if you open and you
show your feelings, you show
your needs, you can get hurt.
That's the risk.
That's the risk of intimacy.
Because if we want real
intimacy in our lives,
we have to be willing to
show our vulnerability.
>> Indeed.
>> We have to show ourselves to
another person in order to feel
intimate.
Not like you take
your vulnerability
and you just throw
it on the floor
there for people to walk on.
You have to have wisdom
in how you use it,
that it's a trustworthy
situation, as far as you
can tell, and you have
boundaries with it.
But at the same time,
that's the only way
we can have that deep
connection with one another.
>> Going back to the
prosperity for a second,
although that was
its own prosperity,
one of the things you say in
your book that I'd love to hear
you talk more about is
that money is energy.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> How is that so?
>> As I mentioned
earlier, what is money?
Really, literally,
it's just pieces
of paper, metal, plastic.
It has no intrinsic value.
It is a symbol that
we have agreed upon
to represent our exchange
of creative energy.
So if you understand that
money is a symbol of energy,
you begin to understand
how it works in our lives.
>> How is it a change
of our creative energy?
Because you don't need money
to exchange creative energy.
We're exchanging that now.
>> Well, what I'm
saying, for example,
is I use my creative
energy to write a book.
>> Right.
>> My publisher pays
me money in exchange--
>> I see.
>> --for that creative energy.
>> OK.
>> Got it.
>> All right.
Then my publisher sells
the book to the bookstore,
gets money for his
creative energy.
And we're simplifying
here a little bit.
>> Yes, but I'm with you.
>> You walk into the bookstore,
you use the money you get from
doing this--
>> From WISDOM Television.
>> Yes, exactly.
>> And I buy--
>> And you buy my book.
>> I do.
>> You see, so--
>> I did.
>> --we have each done whatever
our creative energy is,
and our skills, and money
is the medium that we use.
Back in the good old days,
we lived in little villages,
we just exchanged.
We just bartered.
We didn't need money.
But life got more complicated
and we couldn't just
do that anymore.
So money is simply a symbol of
the creative energy and skill
that we have to exchange
with one another.
So if you understand
that money is really
just a symbol of energy--
>> Of energy.
>> --then you can see how it
reflects how energy is flowing
in our lives.
If you are doing
what you really need
to be doing, if you're
being true to yourself
and you're just walking along
your path step by step, just
right where you want
to be, and need to be,
and in the flow of your
life, usually money
is flowing through your life
in the exact appropriate amount
that you need.
I don't know if
you've noticed this.
>> I have.
>> When you're really
right where you need to be,
there's just the
right amount of money.
>> There's enough.
>> There's not usually a
whole lot more than you need--
>> No.
>> --I find.
Once you're--
>> But there's enough.
>> --doing this in a conscious
way, there's just enough.
So it's not a problem.
It's not an issue.
You're supported and moving
along the way you need to.
If you have a money
problem, especially
like a temporary financial
crisis or setback,
I find that, more
often than not,
that's a reflection that,
on some other level,
the energy is getting blocked.
And it's sort of like a
wake up call, hey, something
needs attention.
Something needs
healing or changing.
Some way I'm not
being true to myself,
or I'm not taking
care of myself,
or I'm not taking that
risk that I need to,
or I'm taking some risk that
I really shouldn't be taking.
So then it's a matter
of looking, ah, where's
the energy blocked here?
So money can be a
teacher and a reflection
that can help us see what's
going on inside of us.
Sometimes it may relate
specifically to money,
like you need to learn something
more about managing money.
So there's a problem here and
it's showing you, hey, wake up,
something to learn.
But often, it may not even
have to do with money itself.
It may have to do with you're
not nurturing yourself enough.
You're not setting clear
boundaries for yourself.
You're giving away too
much, or something.
You know?
>> Yeah.
>> So it's interesting
to look at it that way.
People who have
chronic money issues,
like always struggling, never
quite making it, or just--
>> They had to buy the dress.
>> --barely making it.
>> They had to buy the shoes.
>> Well--
>> Those kind of people.
>> --OK, that's a
different thing.
>> Is it?
>> Yeah.
But basically, there's a lot
of addictions around money.
>> Right.
>> Just different ways that
we use money to try to satisfy
some craving we have
that doesn't really work.
>> The devil made
me buy those shoes.
>> Yeah.
Well, that's just definitely a
whole big issue for many of us.
We all have some kind
of addiction or other.
And money, different ways
of working with money,
sometimes are different
addictive processes.
But what I was
actually addressing
was people who just
have chronic struggle
to just have enough
money to make ends meet.
Very often, it has to
do with issues of power.
Money gives us a certain
amount of power in the world.
So if we're afraid of power,
then we sort of unconsciously
may choose not to
have very much money
and to always be
struggling about money.
>> Oh, yes.
>> Because we're afraid to step
into the power of having more
money.
And I'm not saying there's
anything better or worse
about more money.
I mean, it's only what you
do with it that matters.
But it is an issue
for many people
that they don't realize the
real issue is about power.
So if you have-- what I'm
suggesting to people--
is if you have a chronic
issue of lack of money,
or struggle around
money, or self-sabotage,
look honestly to see how
you feel about power, that
moving into being more
powerful, because that's usually
what it's about.
>> Before you go, now that
you're a successful author
and well-known speaker, how's
your life balance going?
Are you practicing
what you're preaching?
Are you spending
more time at home?
>> You know, I'm always
practicing what I'm preaching
in terms of--
in fact, ask my husband,
and any of my friends,
I'm practically obsessed
with consciousness.
I'm always looking,
and trying to learn,
and working on
myself, and all that.
In fact, a of times what I
need to do to be more balanced
is let go of all that
and just have some fun.
>> Yeah.
>> I do that.
So, yeah, I do really
work on practicing--
>> Good.
>> --what I'm preaching.
And it's an ongoing
process, for sure.
And I do deal and grapple
with things on a daily basis
just like everybody does.
And as I mentioned
earlier, for me,
the balance issue
mostly has to do
with balancing my work, career,
responsible parts with the ones
that need more time,
quiet, nurturing.
>> Well, for me, you've been
a great example of balance.
And I thank you for
talking to us at WISDOM.
>> My pleasure.
>> And I hope we talk again.
>> Yeah, me too.
>> Yeah.
>> I'd love that.
>> Yeah, I have a
feeling we will.
>> Great.
>> OK.
>> Thank you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]